if you guys have seen this channel
before you know I really do politics I
don't deal with psychology except when I
deal with the politics of psychology or
the psychology of politics and these two
things do overlap in a really dynamic
and interesting way one reason being
that both in politics and in psychology
we have to separate carefully the
problem from the perception of the
problem
whichever problem we happen to be
dealing with we have to deal with very
carefully what is the problem itself and
then how did this come to be noticed how
did this come to be perceived how did
this come to be defined who is it that
perceives it as a problem and who is it
that perceives it as something normal or
even as positive is not a problem at all
and these things may come back to
cultural values they may come back to
very complex and difficult to to pin
down factors now in talking about
sociopathy and talking about people
being sociopaths in talking about people
having antisocial personality disorder
who perceives something like empathy who
perceives compassion and who fails to
perceive it you guys probably know and
if you don't know you need don't need to
look into the the particular example
there's been a lot of talk lately about
a certain young man not feeling sad when
he went to someone's funeral
wealth is funeral and whether or not
this is a symptom of being a sociopath
this kind of thing I've been to many
funerals in my life and it's some of
them I felt more upset than others for
reasons that are completely rational
have to do with how old the person was
when they died the situation the
circumstances their death whether their
death was a surprise or not and how I
felt about it what it what it meant in
my life obviously from a selfish
perspective how upsetting this is to me
is gonna change with my situation my
relationship with the person so and so
forth but you know you'd have to be
crazy so we're talking about here you'd
have to be crazy to pretend that the
sudden death of a 12 year old and
accident is equivalent to someone dying
when they're 80 years old and they
already maybe they already knew five
years in advance that they had a disease
that was progressing and they talked
everyone let everyone know in advance
that we're gonna die and it didn't come
as any as any surprise at all so we
can't look at this as a simple checkmark
on a list do you or do you not have this
this symptom for being a sociopath do
you or do you not appropriately feel
empathy compassion or have you know in
my own life I remember very clearly two
funerals I went to and which I was not
saddened or aggrieved but the person's
death but what I was was emotionally
available for the people who were
grieving so those two funerals the way
was perceived by other people there was
very very different well you'll see what
I have to say just a moment in one case
my grandmother was utterly shattered by
the death of her husband the death of
her second husband it was not my
grandfather and most of the other people
that funeral were just kind of
self-absorbed and distracted and they
weren't spending any time with her they
weren't spending any time with my
grandmother now I wasn't upset or sad
basically because he died at a very very
old age didn't come as a surprise etc I
had a good relationship with him also
it wasn't the situation that he died and
I was left feeling oh if only I had
apologized for something there wasn't
any kind of sense of unfinished business
but everyone else including my own
father notably they were kind of walking
around in a stupor at that funeral I
remember the different attitudes of
people there and I really sat with my
grandmother and talked to her and
listened to her and I was comforting to
her frankly just because I could be you
know I I really wasn't consumed by her
or distracted with you know my own my
own grief in any way and I can remember
or maybe two people at the funeral kind
of shaming me kind of saying something
negative about me because I wasn't
weeping and I wasn't crying I wasn't
distraught in the way that they were
I remember one other person things look
very strange to defend me this other
kind of cousin of mine saying oh well
you know everyone grieves in their own
way and after the funeral was over a
couple days later or something I
remember my grandmother then went out of
her way to really say you know this guy
this was the one guy who really
comforted me this was the one guy was
really compassionate and empathetic and
really helped me out when I was falling
apart wasn't so much at the funeral it
was after sort of reception social event
after funeral and something similar
happened not that not that long later
there was another funeral for someone
who was maybe like my great-uncle
a pretty distant relation where again my
aunt I really started spent time with
her and was kind of solid for her and
there for her in a way that as it
happened at that funeral so nobody else
was for whatever come and I remember her
really she thanked me directly and she
said you know she really recognized know
so in this situation I mean at either
funeral how do people perceive me how do
people perceive the problem and what is
the problem is the problem that I'm not
weeping at my my grandfather's funeral
is it a problem is it a problem or is it
something positive and I took it as a
positive opportunity to kind of be there
for and comfort my grandmother does that
make me more compassionate or less
compassionate than someone who's just
weeping and sobbing and consumed with
their own grief or someone who's just in
a more self-centered way feeling stunned
and off-balance and inarticulate and
doesn't know what to say and just feels
vulnerable and afraid some people are
just afraid of death or just freaked out
and they aren't they aren't playing that
role I played for my grandmother um
maybe judgments of good and bad
maybe judgements of sane and insane
selfish and selfless sociopath and being
generous a spirit maybe those judgments
are actually really inappropriate and
really counterproductive in this context
and I mention it because I'd like you to
consider
that they may be inappropriate and
counterproductive in every context so
I'm going to read for you quickly what I
think is the the main plank the core of
the formal psychiatric definition of
antisocial personality disorder what is
now in popular culture referred to as as
being a sociopath and I think we can
reflect on that a little bit but I mean
the main light motif I want to come back
to you hear again and again is this
question of what is the problem and who
perceives the problem who perceives
something and defines it and it judges
it as compassion or as a lack of
compassion if we say that beauty is in
the eye of the beholder how can we fail
to recognize that being compassionate is
a similar aesthetic judgment and is a
similar you know culturally loaded
judgment at at my grandfather's funeral
was I being the most compassionate
person or was I being the least
compassionate person
maybe both maybe it's maybe it's a
stupid and deeply flawed question so
this is from the text of the dsm-5
criteria for antisocial personality
disorder this is not ancient history
this is I believe the most recent
revision from April 2012 and I got this
text from University website from the
Department of Psychology in a formal
academic institution so I believe this
is correct text this is not from
Wikipedia however by all means if you
have any concerns read the full text
yourself I'm not gonna read every word
of this for obvious reasons but it opens
by saying to diagnose antisocial
personality disorder the following
criteria must be met and then the
headings and subheadings are grouped in
a peculiar way we open with four
criteria which are the four critera I'm
going to read and then the the article
does continue through BCD through a
series of other personality traits that
I'm not I'm not going to
discuss here so again I'm not reading
the entire definition to you but it
opens what I think is the most
fundamental and broad definition of what
this personality disorder is supposed to
be a so you must have in order these
criteria you must have heard of you
diagnose this you must have a
significant impairments in personality
functioning manifest by one impairments
in self functioning such as a or B to
follow a impairments of identity such as
ego centrism self-esteem derived from
personal gain power or pleasure period B
self Direction meaning an impairment in
self Direction goal-setting based on
personal gratification absence of
pro-social internal standards associated
with failure to conform to lawful or
culturally normative ethical behavior
period all right so I'm gonna continue
pause umm self-esteem derived from
personal gain what percentage of people
on earth experience self-esteem derived
from personal gain
is it is it 50 percent is that 80
percent is it 90 percent how broadly or
how narrowly do we define personal gain
if I do something charitable if I hand
out sacks of rice to starving people and
help the poor I may experience that as a
form of pleasure power personal gain
there are people who are egocentric who
are engaged in research trying to find
the cure for cancer or handing out sacks
of rice to starving people I may gain
self esteem and a sense of pleasure
gaining power from studying languages
studying philosophy studying books so
this is incredibly broad incredibly
flexible and it's it's not really clear
in what sense
anyone should perceive this as a problem
under any circumstances
now again I just want to contrast this
to something I have my own biases here
if if you replaced the word personal
gain with gambling all of a sudden all
of a sudden I'm convinced this is a
psychological problem I think I think
there's something really wrong with you
if you're a compulsive gambler frankly I
don't even understand casual gambling or
occasional gambling but that's my bias
like I recognize that I'm prejudiced
what kind of prejudice when you have to
have to perceive the pursuit of any kind
of personal gain in the sense as as
problematic you know again I've
obviously this is not the full
definition but I'm starting by
highlighting just how subjective and
culturally conditioned the perception of
this problem is if you come from a
deeply Christian Western European
cultural tradition maybe you really do
see this part of the definition of
antisocial personality disorder
maybe this really makes a lot of sense
to you that you think it's natural for
people to be self-abnegation and humble
and to not be motivated by a sense of
self esteem derive from personal gain
but even from a Buddhist perspective
even from a Japanese cultural
perspective or something this is this is
pretty hyper what do you mean or is
there something implicit here and how
you define some of these these terms
goal-setting based on personal
gratification again obviously quoting
this at a context but you here we are
reading in context goal-setting based on
personal gratification is that always a
bad thing I mean again if you replaced
the term personal gratification with
gambling in a casino all of a sudden I'm
biased in favor of this but personal
gratification could be anything personal
gratification can be charity work it can
be finding the cure for cancer it can be
leading a movement for civil rights of
an oppressed group of people personal
gratification can mean a lot of things
and you know even if it doesn't even if
maybe somebody is somewhat shallow and
stupid
and their idea of personal gratification
is is somewhat humble maybe my role as
if I'm in the role of a psychotherapist
or something maybe I have to sympathize
with whatever the personal gratification
is that rules their life to some extent
and I've already admitted to you
I have trouble sympathizing with someone
who's a gambler or compulsive gambler
you know for example I don't I don't
regard all these things equally now
again in part of sorry so paragraph be
there one bead it also just stated
failure to conform to lawful or
culturally normative ethical behavior
Saudi Arabia if you don't know anything
about Saudi Arabia just go to youtube
now and look at what life is like in
Saudi Arabia if I lived in Saudi Arabia
this would be true of myself right I
would fail to conform to lawful
culturally normative ethical behavior in
Saudi Arabia communist countries fascist
countries Nazi Germany take whatever
extreme example you want or take a very
normal mundane example of a country in
the real world very often people have
legitimate reasons not to conform to
lawful culturally normative ethical
behavior in the society they live in and
those may be deeply held they may be
carefully considered or they may be
irrational and spontaneous maybe you're
a homosexual who grew up in a Muslim
majority society and you may not have a
lot of philosophical depth in your sense
of rebellion against those norms all you
know is you can't conform you're not
comfortable being part of this culture
for example being a gay person in
Southey Saudi Arabia we can fill in the
blank so again these are very subjective
judgments they're very much culturally
relative judgments okay symbol on
paragraph 2 a paragraph 2 impairments in
interpersonal functioning a or be a
empathy
lack of concern for feelings needs or
suffering of others lack of remorse
after hurting or mistreating another
period and a paragraph we've one more
paragraph to go here this is something
that's objectively perceived or miss
perceived in such a dynamic and
difficult to account for way you guys
may not know this about me I was a
scholar of Buddhism for 10 years many
years I had many many conversations with
people in which from my perspective I
was showing empathy I was really making
the effort to put them on game in terms
of modern slang let's try to put someone
on game and they perceived me as having
no empathy that they perceive me as
being cruel as having lack of concern
for their feelings needs or suffering of
having no remorse
so here's situation I could give a
million examples and I knew other
scholars of Buddhism who really felt the
same way I did a great example is
professor Richard Gombrich
many people thought Richard Gombrich was
a monster because of the way he treated
students the way he treated younger
people with PhDs and this kind of thing
but I had sympathy for his situation and
he had sympathy from behind we had some
real interesting conversations so say I
have a conversation I've already studied
Buddhism for so many years and I'm
talking to a young person who has faith
in this religion and I'm really trying
to tell them this ancient scripture this
ancient piece of paper that's written in
a language you don't really understand
maybe it's a language you just started
studying or what language you haven't
said oh it's an ancient Buddhist
scripture translated into English by a
very biased translator I'm trying to put
you on game and let you know you're
wrong what you believe about this you
have been misled to some extent and to
some extent you're engaging in wishful
thinking and misleading yourself am I
being empathetic am i being
compassionate or my behaving at do I
have is this a symptom of antisocial
personality disorder No
many many of our interactions especially
in the workplace really are this loaded
in this complex I don't you can be a tax
attorney and you can be saying hey I
really know what this piece of paper
means and you don't you've
misinterpreted it or you don't have my
experience you don't but and I'm trying
to let you know there's something that
matters here you can work in a real
estate you can work in taxes you can
work in a million if you could be in
construction you can be saying so and
look you work in construction you think
you know how to use this piece of
equipment safely but I see what you're
doing and you don't so when you have
that kind of intervention with someone
are you showing concern or are you
showing lack of concern who makes that
subjective judgment and even worse if
you have the confessional set up of one
therapist and one patient there were no
other witnesses there were no facts
there there's no appeal to the other
side of the story one person gets to
tell their story from one side and the
therapist is supposed to come to these
kinds of conclusions so I remember one
one young woman she had a PhD so she
wasn't that young uh she had a PhD and
she talked to me about Buddhism but his
philosophy and some related things and I
know she broke down weeping about it
probably repeatedly I had the
conversation I had with her I was just
putting her on game and I mean I know in
one case because my wife at the time now
my ex-wife you know witnessed her
breaking down crying talking about this
advice given nobody else's fiction for
that advice and my ex-wife told me you
know when this this woman was crying but
my ex-wife said to her like I know how
you feel but but aisel aisel is really
being honest not many people are gonna
be honest with you not many people gonna
tell you what he's really like he's
trying to help well you know he's pink
Arthur he's telling you you know what
the problem is so I mean again this is a
really simple story but that woman who
broke down weeping because my advice if
she goes and sits down with her
psychotherapist and gives a one side of
the counter this and you can be in legal
situations maybe she goes and sits down
the university authorities or she system
with the police and she tries to tell
them that I have antisocial personality
disorder she can present this in a way
where the problem is that I have no
concern no empathy no you know that she
can present this in this manner and
maybe the reality is the exact opposite
maybe it's an imperfect mix of the two
or maybe the questions were asking are
framing this with a set of criteria that
are wildly spurious to what it is we're
actually trying to what we're trying to
measure when we're trying to gauge if
you bring the wrong instrument to
measure this you're going to get
measurements that make no sense
right you're get conflicting and
contradictory data coming out of using
in a relevant measurement for what it is
you're you're trying to measure alright
and now we come to the fourth and final
part of this first general thrust of the
definition of antisocial personality
disorder to be number two Section B
intimacy intimacy is an impairment in
interpersonal functioning the incapacity
for mutually intimate relationships
comma as exploitation is a primary means
of relating to others including by
deceit and coercion semicolon use of
dominance or intimidation to control
others now here for the first time in
this article in this entry in the DSM I
think we actually have the definition of
a disorder and I would say that the most
fundamental underlying problem here is
that this document is not written by one
person this is written by committee many
many people participated in this and
probably what they really need to do is
take that that part I just read you and
make it the primary definition or the
whole make it the the essential
criterion that separates this from the
range of normal behavior goal-setting
self esteem derived from gain and the
stuff these are not hard criteria for a
disorder but here at last we have a
that could I think in different cultures
and from different cultural perspectives
and including the subjective perspective
of the person who may have the disorder
the here we have something that is truly
disordered and it's something you that
you might want to go to a therapist and
try to get help for now I'm gonna read
this again with changing one word for
clarification those plain incapacity for
mutually intimate relationships because
exploitation is a primary means of
relating to others , including by deceit
and coercion use of dominance or
intimidation to control others so the
only word of change there they have the
cut the the misleading word as AAS in
English and really I think the word they
need is because instead of as because
that's what's being implied here so if
that is your situation in life that
suddenly puts this whole question
outside of the miasma of merely
subjective and culturally normative
judgments we can make say oh so you have
a problem your problem is you can't have
intimate relationships because these are
the other things that dominate life and
maybe maybe there's some way you can
improve this aspect of your character or
this you know this this rut you're stuck
in as a human being by talking about it
with a therapist maybe when I was
discussing this with my girlfriend
before filming the video we were both
reflecting on the extent to which these
definitions are imperfect and
fundamentally unscientific something my
girlfriend said you know contrasting
this definition the 2012 definition to
the earlier definitions of the same
condition familiy a few years ago DSM 4
DSM 3 you can see how radically the
concept has changed the depth at the
scientific definition of this disease
are disorders age and she said well this
is ridiculous compared to you know a
real medically real verifiable condition
like diabetes you know the definition of
diabetes is not going to change that
much from one manual to the next we see
this being totally random
from the ground up and my girlfriend
asked me a very good question she said
why do we need to create these
definitions anyway what is the point of
you know what is the point of defining
and categorizing people in this way and
I jumped answer I said there is one
reason there is just one very good
reason and the reason is so that you can
help them if it is possible to take this
definition and link it to the experience
of therapists experience of people and
reaching out to talking to working
through these problems people and
helping them if there is some etiology
to this type of behavior or this type of
whatever want to say personality problem
characteristic rut and if therapists
have the experience of talking to people
with these problems and helping them
through them and either I mean it
nobody's going to talk about them being
cured but maybe they can discipline
themselves in some way where they
improve on their ability to have
intimate relationships and maybe they
just do some crazy BDSM stuff on
Saturdays and Sundays maybe they manage
to become more aware of their tendency
to be deceitful
and coercive and they can talk they can
tune that out or tone that you know
maybe they can change if there is some
potential for helping people or talking
through the problems making people more
aware of them and helping people tell
themselves that and that alone is the
justification for why we medicalize what
our ultimate lee in no way medical or
scientific disorders okay guys thank you
for joining me in this discussion of
quote unquote sociopathy you know in the
last year I've done a lot of research
into the state of psychiatry and
psychotherapy that I didn't think I'd be
doing partly because different people in
my life have prompted me again and again
to do more research on antidepressants
the use of prescription psychiatric
medication
and I've seen the extent to which we
really are looking at a set of aesthetic
moral judgments hi Lisa
objective highly culturally relative
moral judgments that have come to be
regarded as scientific facts and it is
now through social media including here
on YouTube that I think people are
starting to wake up to just how
outrageous that is and how genuinely
dangerous the consequences of that mode
of thinking can be science is not
dangerous scientism is dangerous and
it's scientism that grows out of the
combination of ignorance and frankly
moral self-righteousness that you know
psychiatric judgments perhaps more than
any other province of the sciences you
know they invite us to make these kinds
of judgments these kinds of judgments
that all revolve around the
self-centered ego of delusion of oh I
would never do that that would never
happen to me I could never imagine
myself being in that situation because
I'm not a sociopath I don't have this
disorder I don't have this personality
trait that somehow separates humanity
into two different categories those who
are capable of evil and those who are
incapable of evil and it is much more
humbling and indeed much more empathetic
to look at these other people and to to
imagine yourself even if it's just as a
thought of your size and really think
through the extent to which you are
capable of that same evil or you are
capable of making those same errors and
there is no simple medical or scientific
fact that separates the perpetrator from
the person who has not thus perpetrated
the lines we draw our ethical and they
are elective and they are ultimately
aesthetic the difference between sane
and insane is never going to be like the
difference between someone who is
diabetic and someone who was not
diabetic it's going to be much more like
the difference between great poetry
bad poetry it's going to rely on
judgments that are very difficult to
verify
just like the judgments I offered as
examples my behavior at that funeral and
so on that may be perceived by one
person as the pinnacle of compassion and
may be perceived by someone else as
utterly lacking in that same thing